# Getting started

Once genomes or bins are obtained, the most common type of analysis is to identify genes and genomic features for ecological analysis. Unlike bin production, where a single workflow creates multiple outputs, annotation is per-genome task so needs to be repeated for each bin you have created (although it can be automated through loops, arrays, or clever grouping of your data). 

In the case where binning is not of interest/required, annotations together with metagenomic and metatranscriptomic coverage profiles are valuable for analyses of function across ecological spaces. Taxonomic annotations can be obtained using Metaxa2 (although these tend to be poorly assembled) for the purposes of estimating diversity. However, the main drawback here is the lack of linkage between taxonomic/diversity information and functional annotations. 

This workflow uses software loaded by the **annotation_pipe** alias. In addition to loading the required software, this pipeline also creates a series of shortcuts to annotation databases relevant to the sortware loaded. These are:

|Alias|Database|Software used|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|UNIPROT_udb|UniProt (SwissProt and TrEBML; downloaded 2018/10/26)|**usearch**|
|UNIPROT_dmnd|-|**diamond**|
|UNIREF100_udb|UniRef100 (downloaded 2018/10/26)|**usearch**|
|UNIREF100_dmnd|-|**diamond**|
|KEGG_udb|KEGG (downloaded 2018/05/23)|**usearch**|
|UNIREF90_udb|UniRef90|**usearch**|
|NR_dmnd|NCBI non-redundant proteins v4.5.15|**diamond**|
|EGGNOG_hmm|EggNOG v4.5|**hmmer**|
|TIGRFAM_hmm|TIGRfam v14.0|**hmmer**|
|PFAM_hmm|Pfam v32.0|**hmmer**|
|RFAM_cm|Rfam v14.0|**cmmer**|

This protocol details a few common annotation steps with the ultimate aim of passing them into a script called **annotationAggregrator.py**, which builds a table of all genes and genomic features that you can easily parse.
