# Getting started

Beyond gene annotation, there are other characteristics of prokaryotic genomes that we might want to characterise. Examples of a few are given below, all of which are performed on the assembled genome file, not the **prodigal** predictions.

For this workflow, we use the following software:

1. [**MeTaxa2**](https://microbiology.se/software/metaxa2/) v2.1.3
1. [**Aragorn**](https://github.com/TheSEED/aragorn) v1.2.38
1. [**Infernal**](http://eddylab.org/infernal/) v1.1.2
1. [**CRISPRdisco**](https://github.com/CRISPRlab/CRISPRdisco)

----

### Ribosomal RNA prediction

Probably the first thing you want to do with a new genome or bin is to search for 16S and 23S rRNA sequences to try to get a rough idea of the taxonomy of the organism. These are valuable for classifying your organism, and this information is great if you need to link your data to amplicon sequences, or the scientific literature. This is a pretty quick program to run, so although it can use multiple threads it's pretty unlikely you'll need them.

By deafult, **MeTaxa2** will attempt to identify SSU and LSU sequences that match bacteria, archaea, chloroplast, eukaryotic, and mitochondria models. The specific outputs will be appended to the end of the file name specified with the **-o** flag. You can examine these yourself, but by default the **annotationAggregrator.py** script (detailed [here](https://github.com/GenomicsAotearoa/environmental_metagenomics/blob/master/metagenomic_annotation/3.aggregation.md)) will parse all of these outputs and summarise their results, so there's no need to curate the outputs.

```
metaxa2 --cpu 1 -g ssu -i genome.fna -o genome.metaxa.ssu

metaxa2 --cpu 1 -g lsu -i genome.fna -o genome.metaxa.lsu
```

----

### Transfer-RNA and tmRNA prediction

**Aragorn** can be used to predict tRNA and tmRNAs in your genome. There are a range of parameters to optimise with this program, but for a decent starting point

```
aragorn -m -t -gcstd -l -a -q -rn -fon -o genome.aragorn genome.fna
```

These parameter choices are:

1. **-m**: Search for tmRNA sequences
1. **-t**: Search for tRNA sequences
1. **-gcstd**: Use standard genetic code.
1. **-l**: Assume that each sequence has a linear topology (search does not assume a circular/complete genome)
1. **-a**: Print out tRNA domain for tmRNA genes.
1. **-q**: Dont print configuration line
1. **-rn**: Repeat sequence name before summary information
1. **-fon**: Output file format as fasta, without fold modelling
1. **-o**: Output file name (default is stdout)

This will produce the output that the aggregator script expects, but as long as the **-fon** and **-a** flags are present **annotationAggregrator.py** should handle variations without issue.

----

###  Noncoding RNA detection

Non-coding RNAs (ncRNA) can be predicted in your genome using **Infernal**, which is produced by the same people who created **hmmer**. It uses a statistical model similar to an HMM, called a covariance model (CM) to identify these RNA structures. Prediction is performed by comparing your genome against the *Rfam* database, and requires you to know the approximate size of your genome to accurately calculate match significance. This can be calculated on the command line using bash, then fed directly into **Infernal**.

```
totChar=`grep -v '>' genome.fna | wc -m`
nLines=`grep -v '>' genome.fna | wc -l`
nt=$((totChar - nLines))
ntM=`echo 'scale=5 ; $nt / 1000000' | bc`

cmscan -Z $ntM --cut_ga --nohmmonly --tblout genome.rfam $RFAM_cm genome.fna
```

----

### CRISPR detection

Everyone loves CRISPR-Cas! Predict CRISPR sequences in your genomes by creating a text file of genome names/paths, then pass it to **CRISPRDisco**

```
source activate /nesi/project/uoa02469/Software/PipelineSetup/crisprdisco_env

echo ",Path" > disco_input.csv
echo ",0,genome.fna" > disco_input.csv

disco disco_input.csv
```

----