# Getting started

This is the basic process of ensuring the quality of raw sequence reads, and removing (or trimming) reads which fail a pre-defined quality threshold either across the whole read, or in some sub-section of the read. The commands below are written assuming Illumina paired-end sequencing (MiSeq, HiSeq, NextSeq etc.).

There are three good quality trimming tools available and it is the users choice which to use.

1. [**sickle**](https://github.com/najoshi/sickle) v1.33
1. [**trimmomatic**](http://www.usadellab.org/cms/index.php?page=trimmomatic) v0.39
1. [**BBMap**](https://jgi.doe.gov/data-and-tools/bbtools/bb-tools-user-guide/bbmap-guide/) v38.95

Only `trimmomatic` and `BBMap` are on NeSI as modules. You can obtain `sickle` from the link provided. It is lightweight and open-source.

The examples below are given with approximately equivalent settings but there are a few differences in behaviour that cannot be captured. Specifically, these commands will run with the following specifications:

* FastQ files are in phred33 encoding
* We require a minimum quality score of Q30
* We will only accept sequences longer than 80 bp after trimming
* Orphan sequences (sequences which pass filtering, but their paired partner does not) are to be reported

These should be changed according to your sequencing platform and read length obtained.

### Pre-processing reads

If you have samples that were sequenced over multiple lanes, concatenate the files for each read (R1 or R2, **separately**) into sets of paired read files per sample. It is also advisable to rename sample files to a simpler format for ease of downstream processing (e.g. sampleA_R1, sampleA_R2, sampleB_R1, sampleB_R2...)


*Note: If you are working in the Handley lab, this workflow uses software loaded by the **genome_pipe** alias.*

----

### sickle

```bash
sickle pe -t sanger -n -q 30 -l 80 \
          -f SampleA_R1.fq.gz -r SampleA_R2.fq.gz \
          -o SampleA_R1.trim.fq -p SampleA_R2.trim.fq \
          -s SampleA_single.trim.fq
```

The only flag in this example that differs from the list above is the **-n** flag, which tells sickle to cut the sequence at the first *N* base. Unlike the next two examples, **sickle** does not allow for multithreaded trimming.

----

### Trimmomatic

```bash
trimmomatic PE -threads 10 -phred33 LEADING:3 TRAILING:3 \
               SLIDINGWINDOW:4:30 MINLEN:80 \
               SampleA_R1.fq.gz SampleA_R2.fq.gz \
               SampleA_R1.trim.fq.gz SampleA_R1.trim_single.fq.gz \
               SampleA_R2.trim.fq.gz SampleA_R2.trim_single.fq.gz

cat SampleA_R1.trim_single.fq.gz SampleA_R2.trim_single.fq.gz > SampleA_single.trim.fq.gz
```

Because **trimmomatic** exports separate orphan files for the forward and reverse reads, I just merge them together using **cat**. Some of the parameters for trimmomatic are a bit cryptic, so briefly:

1. *SLIDINGWINDOW:4:30*: This tells **trimmomatic** to read the sequence 4 base pairs at a time, and truncate the read if the average quality score over this window is less
than 30.
1. *LEADING:3*: Cut the start of the sequence so that there are no leading *N* bases or bases with Q<3.
1. *TRAILING:3*: - Cut the end of the sequence so that there are no tailing *N* bases or bases with Q<3.

----

### BBMap

BBMap is a program released by the JGI which does just about everything. To run its quailty filtering protocol with similar settings to above:

```bash
bbduk.sh qtrim=rl trimq=30 \
         in1=SampleA_R1.fq.gz in2=SampleA_R2.fq.gz \
         out1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq out2=SampleA_R2.trim.fq outs=SampleA_single.trim.fq.gz
```

However, it is also possible to simultaneously screen your reads for contaminant PhiX sequences while performing the quality checking. To modify the above command:

```bash
bbduk.sh qtrim=rl trimq=30 \
         stats=Sample.phix.txt k=31 hdist=1 ref=$BBMAP_phix \
         in1=SampleA_R1.fq.gz in2=SampleA_R2.fq.gz \
         out1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq out2=SampleA_R2.trim.fq outs=SampleA_single.trim.fq.gz \
         outm1=SampleA_R1.phix.fq outm2=SampleA_R2.phix.fq outms=SampleA_s.phix.fq.gz
```

This will use rapid k-mer profiling to identify reads that look like PhiX genome data, and split them off into the 'phix' output files. Please note that the variable **$BBMAP_phix** is defined when you run the **genome_pipe** command. If you are loading **BBMap** from other means, you will need to download the appropriate reference yourself. The PhiX reference is included in the [package](https://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/) found in the *reference* directory.

----
