# Introduction

## *Disclaimer*

*We are currently in the process of migrating to a software stack containerised in [singularity](https://sylabs.io/docs/). This workflow is still valid, but will likely be replaced soon with the updated version.*

##  Getting started

The full workflows described in this document require many interacting pieces of software, which are installed and maintained by either the NeSI support team (for general-purpose
programs) or David Waite (for metagenomics-specific programs). The general approach of NeSI is that a minimal number of programs are available to the user upon log in, but extra software can be accessed by specifically loading in pre-installed software modules. This is done to minimise the risk of dependency conflicts between software, but can be quite tedious to work under. In order to simplify this program, there are a number of scripts available to Handley lab members which automatically load in software in a workflowdependent manner.

For quick access to these programs, you can use the script **loadme.sh** to automatically update your user profile to access these workflows. Please not that you should only run this script ONCE. If you believe it has not executed correctly, please contact David immediately in order to resolve issues. As this script is making changes to your user profile,
if something goes genuinely wrong it can ruin your login sessions permanently (or until NeSI Support can fix it) so please don't play around with this script. To perform this
modification, copy/paste the following command into your command line:

```
/nesi/project/uoa02469/Software/PipelineSetup/loadme.sh
```

This script adds four commands to your console:

1. **genome_pipe**: A shortcut to load the software for quality filtering reads, assembling (meta)genomes, and read mapping.
1. **binning_pipe**: A shortcut to load the software for read mapping, metagenomic binning and bin refinement.
1. **annotation_pipe**: A shortcut to load the software for gene prediction, annotation, and detection of other genomic features such as ribosomal RNA, tRNAs, and ncRNAs.
1. **gtdbtk_pipe**: A shortcut to specifically load the [GTDB-TK](https://gtdb.ecogenomic.org/) software for the classification of bacterial and archaeal genomes.

Please note that these shortcuts are really just **bash** aliases and if you submit a job to NeSI they will not work. Use thef ollowing commands for a **slurm** submission:

|Local alias|slurm command|
|:---|:---|
|genome_pipe|source /nesi/project/uoa02469/Software/PipelineSetup/genomic.sh|
|binning_pipe|source /nesi/project/uoa02469/Software/PipelineSetup/binning.sh|
|annotation_pipe|source /nesi/project/uoa02469/Software/PipelineSetup/gtdbtk.sh|
|gtdbtk_pipe|source /nesi/project/uoa02469/Software/PipelineSetup/annotation.sh|

## Before you proceed

This guide is meant as a quick *how-to* manual for getting your data processed on NeSI. It does not explain the theory or background of the steps involved, or dive into detail on why we want to do each of these steps. It is up to the user to familiarise themselves with the necessary literature.