# Getting started

Now that we have a set of refined, dereplicated bins, the final step prior to annotation and analysis is to get a final evaluation of the bin quality, and assign taxonomy to each bin. A [recently published standard](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28787424) for MAG (metagenome-assembled genome, what we call a bin) quality defines categories of quality as follows:

|State|Completeness|Contaimnation|Assembly quality|
|:---|:---:|:---:|:---|
|Finished|-|-|Single contiguous sequence without gaps or ambiguities with a consensus error rate equivalent to Q50 or better.|
|High-quality draft|>90%|<5%|Multiple fragments where gaps span repetitive regions. Presence of the 23S, 16S, and 5S rRNA genes and at least 18 tRNAs.|
|Medium-quality draft|≥50%|<10%|Many fragments with little to no review of assembly other than reporting of standard assembly statistics.|
|Low-quality draft|<50%|<10%|Many fragments with little to no review of assembly other than reporting of standard assembly statistics.|

However, bin quality can be a bit of a tricky beast to deal with. It is often difficult to recover rRNA elements from metagenomic assemblies, so it is common to have bins with a high completeness but comparatively low standard. There is also no guarantee that a high-quality draft will actually be of value to a study. Even at 90% complete, there will be some genes missing from the bin and therefore a degree of false negative findings in annotation. We can hedge this to a degree by having an accurate taxonomy for each bin, allowing us to predict the functionality that '*should*' be present and to identify genes that are suggestive of function. Finally, reverse is also true. A low-quality draft bin might be useless for any real genomic analysis, but might consist solely of an important biosynthetic cluster of genes and some housekeeping markers that can be used for taxonomic prediction. This alone may be all that is needed for answering a hypothesis.

So in summary - quality thresholds are useful, but only a guideline and not a reflection of biological usefulness of the data.

For this workflow, we use the following software:

1. [**CheckM**](https://github.com/Ecogenomics/CheckM) v1.0.13
1. [**GTDB-TK**](https://github.com/cmks/DAS_Tool) v1.5.0

The above softwares are all available on NeSI as modules.

----

### CheckM

We have already been briefly introduced to **CheckM**, but here we can dive into the inner workings in a little more detail. **CheckM** is a tool for evaluating the assembly quality of a genome or bin by assessing sets of single-copy markers conserved across either the bacterial or archaeal domain. The actual method used to score the presence of these markers is detailed in the [original publication](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4484387/) but it is quite complex. The gist of the method can be summarised as:

1. Genomes assessed for presence of 120 (bacterial) and 122 (archaeal) single-copy markers
1. Completeness is estimated by the number of markers present and fragmentation of the operons on which they occur
1. Contamination is estimated by the number of duplication observations
1. A rough taxonomy for the genome is inferred using observed markers
1. Completess and comtamination are adjusted for ancestral deletions or duplications

This gives us estimates of the complete and contaminated the each genome or bin. To run **CheckM**:

```bash
checkm lineage_wf -t 20 --pplacer_threads 10 -x fa --tab_table -f bin_summary.txt user_bins/ checkm_output/
```

Take note of the following parameters:

1. **-t**: The number of threads to use for gene prediction
1. **-–pplacer_threads** The number of threads to use for phylogenetic placement. Increasing this drastically increases memory consumption
1. **-x** Genome file extension. The default is *.fna* but various binners use *.fasta* or *.fa*. Make sure these are consistent for your final set of bins
1. **--tab_table**: Summarise the results in a tab delimited table
1. **-f**: The name of the file for output

----

### GTDB-TK

The **GTDB-TK** is a stripped down version of the larger **Genome Taxonomy Database** ([website](https://gtdb.ecogenomic.org/), [publication](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30148503)) project, run out of Philip Hugenholtz's lab at the Univesity of Queensland. It makes use of over 125,000 publicly available bacterial and archaeal genomes to produce a phylogeny based on core marker genes, similar to those used by **CheckM**. The **GTDB-TK** software automatically identifies markers in genomes and creates a representative protein alignment of the main alignment used by the **GTDB**. This alignment is then inserted into a guide tree and the most likely taxonomy for each genome calculated by the placement of the genome in the tree, and the length of its branch from nearest neighbours.

If you're working with this software, note that the **GTDB** as a whole is aiming to make significant changes to prokaryotic nomenclature and contains a number of differences from accepted taxonomy. There are generally published manuscripts that report these differences (for example, [Chuvochina *et al.*](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.syapm.2018.07.003), [Waite *et al.*](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118960608.bm00040)), and there is ongoing collaboration between the **GTDB** team and the ICNP (the effective arbiters of prokaryote taxonomy) to make **GTDB** proposals official. You are advised to check any **GTDB** classifications against other references to ensure the name makes sense and to correct names to their currently accepted versions as appropriate (for example, the phylum *Bacteroidetes* is reported as *Bacteroidota* in **GTDB-TK**).

Running this program is extremely easy, although not that it is not loaded by the **genome_pipe** command, but intstead comes under the **gtdbtk_pipe** command.

```bash
gtdbtk classify_wf -x fa --cpus 10 --genome_dir user_bins/ --out_dir gtdbtk_output/
```

There are a few output files of interest here. Most importantly, note that bacterial and archaeal genomes are reported in different files, so make sure that you check both for the placement of your bins. If you want a more robust tree to confirm placement, you can extract reference genomes from the *msa* files and use them in any good phylogenetic inference tool.

----

### 16S rRNA based phylogeny

If you are trying to match your bins to amplicon data, or are interested in obtaining a 16S rRNA gene sequence for performing a more traditional phylogenteic analysis, the tool **MeTaxa2** can be used to attempt to recover 16S and 23S rRNA gene sequences from your bins. Details for this tool are provided in the [genomic features](https://github.com/GenomicsAotearoa/environmental_metagenomics/blob/master/metagenomic_annotation/2.genomic_features.md) notebook.

----
