# Getting started

Following the assembly of metagenomic contigs, we use differences in coverage profiles and sequence composition to separate the contigs into bins. The compositional information of each sequence is inherent with in, but coverage must be determined by mapping each sequenced sample against the combined assembly. Once this profile is obtained, we can begin binning.

1. [**seqmagick**](https://fhcrc.github.io/seqmagick/) v0.7.0
1. [**bowtie**](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/index.shtml) v1.2.0
1. [**bowtie2**](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml) v2.3.2
1. [**BBMap**](https://jgi.doe.gov/data-and-tools/bbtools/bb-tools-user-guide/bbmap-guide/) v39.73

This workflow uses software loaded by the **genome_pipe** alias.

----

### Filtering short reads using seqmagick

When assembly metagenomic data, we expect to encounter a large number of very short sequences of several hundred base pairs in length. Biologically, these are not really that useful since they are too short to reliably encode genes, and they inflate noise in the binning process. We use the absolutely amazing tool **seqmagick** to remove short read from the assembly. Typically we exclude sequences less than 2,000 bp in length, but this can be changed according to the quality of your assembly.

```bash
seqmagick convert --min-length 2000 your_assembly.fasta contigs.fna
```

----

### *bowtie* and *bowtie2*

The first step is to obtain coverage data for each sample assembled into your coassembly. This is done by mapping the individual read files back to the coassembly using either
**bowtie** or **bowtie2**. There isn't much difference between these in terms of how we call these tools, except that **bowtie** allows for more specific read mapping than **bowtie2**.

The commands below will run both versions with the following parameters

1. **-p** Number of threads to use
1. **–phred33-quals** / **–phred33** How the quality information is recorded in FastQ
1. **–large-index** Needed for large assemblies. **bowtie** will tell you if this is required when you try to map
1. **-n** / **-N** The number of mismatches permitted between read and assembled contig
1. **-l** / **-L** The number of left-most bases to consider when testing whether the read satisfies the **-n** criteria
1. **–minins** The minimum insert size to accept when placing forward and reverse read pairs
1. **–maxins** The maximum insert size to accept when placing forward and reverse read pairs

Both versions of bowtie require an initial step of indexing your assembled contigs, then a per-sample round of mapping the reads to the assembly.

#### bowtie

```bash
bowtie-build -f contigs.fna bowtie_contigs

bowtie --phred33-quals --large-index -p 30 -n 1 -l 150 --best --sam \
       --minins 200 --maxins 800 bowtie_contigs \
       -1 SampleA_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleA_R2.trim.fq > SampleA.sam

bowtie --phred33-quals --large-index -p 30 -n 1 -l 150 --best --sam \
       --minins 200 --maxins 800 bowtie_contigs \
       -1 SampleB_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleB_R2.trim.fq > SampleB.sam
```

#### bowtie2

```bash
bowtie2-build contigs.fna bowtie_contigs

bowtie2 --phred33 -p 30 -N 1 -L 32 --minins 200 --maxins 800 -x bowtie_contigs \
        -1 SampleA_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleA_R2.trim.fq > SampleA.sam

bowtie2 --phred33 -p 30 -N 1 -L 32 --minins 200 --maxins 800 -x bowtie_contigs \
        -1 SampleB_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleB_R2.trim.fq > SampleB.sam
```

----

### BBMap

Alternatively, you can use **BBMap** to map your reads against the assembly. **BBMap** has two ways of running, either by creating a mapping database on disk or in memory. If you only need to map once, the memory version provides a quicker run time. However, if you plan to map multiple sequence libraries against the reference, then it's worth building the persistant (disk) database.

#### Memory-only reference

```bash
bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna nodisk in1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq in2= SampleA_R2.trim.fq out=SampleA.sam
bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna nodisk in1=SampleB_R1.trim.fq in2= SampleB_R2.trim.fq out=SampleB.sam
```

#### Persistant reference

When run without the **nodisk** flag, BBMap will create a folder called *ref/* in the location itis called, and build the database there. This can be changed if desired. If you write a specify a new reference file while running from the same location, the default behaviour is to overwrite the old reference, so be careful with how you use this command. It is possible to build multiple databases in the same folder, but refer to the user documentation for this approach.

**Default ref/ database**

```bash
bbmap.sh ref=contigs.fna

bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna in1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq in2= SampleA_R2.trim.fq out=SampleA.sam
bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna in1=SampleB_R1.trim.fq in2= SampleB_R2.trim.fq out=SampleB.sam
```

**Manually specified database**

```bash
bbmap.sh ref=contigs.fna path=/another/location/

bbmap.sh t=30 ref=/another/location/contigs.fna in1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq in2= SampleA_R2.trim.fq out=SampleA.sam
bbmap.sh t=30 ref=/another/location/contigs.fna in1=SampleB_R1.trim.fq in2= SampleB_R2.trim.fq out=SampleB.sam
```

----