
- [0. Introduction and required software](#0-introduction-and-required-software)
  - [Required software](#required-software)
- [1. Filter contigs by length](#1-filter-contigs-by-length)
- [2. Obtain contig coverage profiles](#2-obtain-contig-coverage-profiles)
  - [1. Map reads to contigs](#1-map-reads-to-contigs)
    - [bowtie](#bowtie)
    - [bowtie2](#bowtie2)
    - [BBMap](#bbmap)
  - [2. Compress SAM files](#2-compress-sam-files)
  - [3. Generate coverage profile](#3-generate-coverage-profile)

---

## 0. Introduction and required software

### Required software
1. [**bowtie**](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/index.shtml) v1.2.3
1. [**bowtie2**](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml) v2.4.1
1. [**BBMap**](https://jgi.doe.gov/data-and-tools/bbtools/bb-tools-user-guide/bbmap-guide/) v38.95
1. [**seqmagick**](https://fhcrc.github.io/seqmagick/)
1. [**SAMtools**](http://www.htslib.org/)
3. [**MetaBAT**](https://bitbucket.org/berkeleylab/metabat/src/master/) v2.13

---

## 1. Filter contigs by length

When assembling metagenomic data, we expect to encounter a large number of very short sequences of several hundred base pairs in length. Biologically, these are not really that useful since they are too short to reliably encode genes, and they inflate noise in the binning process. We use the absolutely amazing tool [**seqmagick**](https://fhcrc.github.io/seqmagick/) to remove short read from the assembly. Typically we exclude sequences less than 1-2 kbp in length, but this can be changed according to the quality of your assembly.

```bash
seqmagick convert --min-length 2000 your_assembly.fasta contigs.fna
```

---

## 2. Obtain contig coverage profiles

Following the assembly of metagenomic contigs, we use differences in coverage profiles and sequence composition to separate the contigs into bins. The compositional information of each sequence is inherent within, but coverage must be determined by mapping each sequenced sample against the combined assembly. Once this profile is obtained, we can begin binning.

### 1. Map reads to contigs

The first step is to obtain coverage data for each sample in your assemblies. This is done by mapping the individual read files back to the assembly using either **bowtie**, **bowtie2**, or **BBMap**. 

For **bowtie** and **bowtie2**, there is not much difference between these in terms of how we call these tools, except that **bowtie** allows for more specific read mapping than **bowtie2**. Perhaps the most important consideration when deciding which software to use is that **bowtie2** allows for gapped and local alignment with more efficiency for longer reads than **bowtie**. Other important considerations for choosing one over the other are summarised [here](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/faq.shtml)

The commands below will run both **bowtie** and **bowtie2** with the following parameters

1. **-p** Number of threads to use
1. **--phred33-quals** / **--phred33** How the quality information is recorded in FastQ
1. **-n** / **-N** The number of mismatches permitted between read and assembled contig
1. **-l** / **-L** The number of left-most bases to consider when testing whether the read satisfies the **-n** criteria
1. **--minins** The minimum insert size to accept when placing forward and reverse read pairs
1. **--maxins** The maximum insert size to accept when placing forward and reverse read pairs

All aligners mentioned here require an indexing step followed by read mapping. For **bowtie** and **bowtie2**, the database indexing and read mapping steps are distinct. For **BBMap**, they can be done in a single command if desired.

#### bowtie

```bash
bowtie-build -f contigs.fna bowtie_contigs

bowtie --phred33-quals -p 30 -n 1 -l 150 --best --sam \
       --minins 200 --maxins 800 bowtie_contigs \
       -1 SampleA_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleA_R2.trim.fq > SampleA.sam

bowtie --phred33-quals -p 30 -n 1 -l 150 --best --sam \
       --minins 200 --maxins 800 bowtie_contigs \
       -1 SampleB_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleB_R2.trim.fq > SampleB.sam
```

#### bowtie2

```bash
bowtie2-build contigs.fna bowtie_contigs

bowtie2 --phred33 -p 30 -N 1 -L 32 --minins 200 --maxins 800 -x bowtie_contigs \
        -1 SampleA_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleA_R2.trim.fq > SampleA.sam

bowtie2 --phred33 -p 30 -N 1 -L 32 --minins 200 --maxins 800 -x bowtie_contigs \
        -1 SampleB_R1.trim.fq -2 SampleB_R2.trim.fq > SampleB.sam
```

#### BBMap

Alternatively, you can use **BBMap** to map your reads against the assembly. **BBMap** has two ways of running, either by creating a mapping database (reference) on disk or in memory. If you only need to map once, the memory version provides a quicker run time. However, if you plan to map multiple sequence libraries against the reference, then it's worth building the persistent (disk) database.

**Memory-only reference**

```bash
bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna nodisk in1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq in2=SampleA_R2.trim.fq out=SampleA.sam

bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna nodisk in1=SampleB_R1.trim.fq in2=SampleB_R2.trim.fq out=SampleB.sam
```

**Persistent reference**

When run without the **nodisk** flag, BBMap will create a folder called `ref/` in the location from which it is called, and build the database there. This can be changed if desired. If you specify a new reference file while running from the same location, the default behaviour is to overwrite the old reference, so be careful with how you use this command. It is possible to build multiple databases in the same folder, but refer to the user documentation for this approach.

*Default ref/ database*

```bash
bbmap.sh ref=contigs.fna

bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna in1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq in2=SampleA_R2.trim.fq out=SampleA.sam
bbmap.sh t=30 ref=contigs.fna in1=SampleB_R1.trim.fq in2=SampleB_R2.trim.fq out=SampleB.sam
```

*Manually specified database*

```bash
bbmap.sh ref=contigs.fna path=/another/location/

bbmap.sh t=30 ref=/another/location/contigs.fna in1=SampleA_R1.trim.fq in2=SampleA_R2.trim.fq out=SampleA.sam
bbmap.sh t=30 ref=/another/location/contigs.fna in1=SampleB_R1.trim.fq in2=SampleB_R2.trim.fq out=SampleB.sam
```

---

### 2. Compress SAM files

All read mappers/aligners above produce SAM files. We can use **samtools** to generate *bam* files from the initial *sam* alignment to facilitate faster computation for downstream processes.

```bash
samtools sort -@ 10 -o SampleA.bam SampleA.sam
samtools sort -@ 10 -o SampleB.bam SampleB.sam
```

---

### 3. Generate coverage profile

We will use **MetaBAT**'s wrapper script to generate a main contig coverage profile which can be modified later based on the format preferences of each automated binning software.

```bash
jgi_summarize_bam_contig_depths --outputDepth samples.metabat.txt SampleA.bam SampleB.bam
```

---
